feat(docs): Add shadowing reference guide (#17146)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/themes/shadowing.md

---
title: Shadowing
---

> Gatsby themes introduce a concept called "shadowing". This feature allows users to override a component, or any other file, in the `src` directory to customize it.

Reviewer: while it feels like a detail, maybe we should include the fact that only modules that are included in the webpack bundle are shadowed?

```suggestion
Gatsby themes introduce a concept called "shadowing". This feature allows users to replace a file in the `src` directory that is included in the webpack bundle with their own implementation. This works for React components, pages in `src/pages`, JSON files, TypeScript files, as well as any other imported file (such as `.css`) in your site.
```

> A practical use case is when you've installed `gatsby-theme-blog` and want to customize the author Bio component to add your own biographical content. Component shadowing lets you replace the theme’s original file, `gatsby-theme-blog/src/components/bio.js`, with your own file to override with any changes you need.

Reviewer: We should probably just drop `Component` at this point. Also added code ticks around the `Bio` name literal. While shadowing is commonly used to override, it can also be used to extend components or massage data as it flows through the site, so I changed `override` to `make`.

```suggestion
A practical use case is when you've installed `gatsby-theme-blog` and want to customize the author `Bio` component to add your own biographical content. Shadowing lets you replace the theme’s original file, `gatsby-theme-blog/src/components/bio.js`, with your own file to make any changes you need.
```

## Shadowing Example

> If you’ve installed `gatsby-theme-blog` you’ll notice that it renders a `Bio` component which is used in the `BlogPost` template. If you’d like to change the `Bio` component you can do so with component shadowing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you’ve installed `gatsby-theme-blog` you’ll notice that it renders a `Bio` component which is used in the `BlogPost` template. If you’d like to change the `Bio` component you can do so with the shadowing API.
```

### Theme file structure

> You can look at the `gatsby-theme-blog`'s file structure to determine the file path for the file you want to shadow.

Reviewer: probably drop `the` here too? 

```md
You can inspect `gatsby-theme-blog`'s
```

> ```txt

Reviewer: Add the CLI command that generates this as a title?

```suggestion
```txt:title="tree gatsby-theme-blog"
```

├── gatsby-config.js
├── gatsby-node.js
└── src
    ├── components
    │   ├── bio-content.js
    │   ├── bio.js // highlight-line
    │   ├── header.js
    │   ├── headings.js
    │   ├── home-footer.js
    │   ├── layout.js
    │   ├── post-footer.js
    │   ├── post.js
    │   ├── posts.js
    │   ├── seo.js
    │   └── switch.js
    ├── gatsby-plugin-theme-ui
    │   ├── colors.js
    │   ├── components.js
    │   ├── index.js
    │   ├── prism.js
    │   ├── styles.js
    │   └── typography.js
    └── templates
        ├── post.js
        └── posts.js
```

> 

Reviewer 2: We can add this later on, I wouldn't let it hold up publishing.

### Customizing the `Bio` component

In this case, the file to shadow is `gatsby-theme-blog/src/components/bio.js`.

> Component shadowing relies on a mirrored file structure to determine which component will be rendered. In order to override the Bio component in `gatsby-theme-blog`, create a file named `user-site/src/gatsby-theme-blog/components/bio.js`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The shadowing API uses a deterministic file structure to determine which component will be rendered. In order to override the `Bio` component in `gatsby-theme-blog`, create a file named `user-site/src/gatsby-theme-blog/components/bio.js`.
```

> Any file that lives in the `src/gatsby-theme-blog` directory of the user’s site will be used instead of a file with the same name located in the theme’s src directory: `gatsby-theme-blog/src`.

Reviewer: The React docs tend to refer to this pattern as [composition instead of inheritance](https://reactjs.org/docs/composition-vs-inheritance.html) so we should probably reword `"to inherit"` in the suggested comment revision. Perhaps "To re-use parts of the original file from the theme such as functionality or styling, check out...".

Also in "This effectively replaces the entire file" we should drop "effectively" because this is literally what happens, one file replaces another (`import 'a'` becomes `import 'b'`).

This means that `user-site/src/gatsby-theme-blog/components/bio.js` will be rendered in place of `gatsby-theme-blog/src/components/bio.js`:

```js:title=src/gatsby-theme-blog/components/bio.js
import React from "react"
export default () => <h1>My new bio component!</h1>
```

A successful shadow of the Bio component will result in the following directory tree:

```txt
user-site
└── src
    └── gatsby-theme-blog
        └── components
            └── bio.js // highlight-line
```

## Shadowing parent themes

Some themes, including `gatsby-theme-blog`, install other themes. `gatsby-theme-blog` uses `gatsby-plugin-theme-ui`. If you want to customize any of its implementation you can do so with shadowing as well.

> To do so, create a file named `user-site/src/gatsby-theme-blog/gatsby-plugin-theme-ui/index.js`.

Reviewer: the `index.js` file in `gatsby-plugin-theme-ui` isn't a component, so we should use `file` to describe it.

> To shadow the `index.js` file from the parent theme `gatsby-plugin-theme-ui`,

---

also it occurs to me that the naming here is awkward because we're calling something with plugin in its name a theme ("the parent theme: gatsby-plugin-theme-ui"). Perhaps we should drop the "parent theme" nomenclature from this entire section since shadowing applies to all plugins now anyway and we don't reference "parent plugins" anywhere.

> To do so, create a file named `user-site/src/gatsby-theme-blog/gatsby-plugin-theme-ui/index.js`.

Reviewer 2: I updated the suggestion to be shorter, great tips!

```js:title=src/gatsby-theme-blog/gatsby-plugin-theme-ui/index.js
export default {
  fontSizes: [12, 14, 16, 24, 32, 48, 64, 96, 128],
  space: [0, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256],
  colors: {
    blue: `blue`,
    red: `tomato`,
  },
}
```

> You’ll result in the following directory tree:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which will result in the following directory tree:
```

```txt
user-site
└── src
    └── gatsby-theme-blog
        └── components
            └── tokens
                  └──index.js // highlight-line
```

## Any source file is shadowable

> Component shadowing isn’t restricted to React components; you can override any JavaScript, Markdown, MDX, or CSS file in the `src` directory. This gives you fine-grained control of all functionality, content, and styling that a theme provides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The shadowing API isn’t restricted to React components; you can override any JavaScript, Markdown, MDX, or CSS file in the `src` directory. This gives you fine-grained control of all functionality, content, and styling that a theme provides.
```

If you wanted to shadow a CSS file in `gatsby-theme-awesome-css` that's found at `src/styles/bio.css` you can do so by creating `user-site/src/gatsby-theme-awesome-css/styles/bio.css`

```js:title=user-site/src/gatsby-theme-awesome-css/styles/bio.css
.bio {
  border: 10px solid tomato;

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
}
```

```

The theme's `bio.css` file would then be replaced with your new CSS file.

## Extending shadowed files

> In addition to overriding files, you can _extend_ any JavaScript file in the `src` directory.

Reviewer: Technically you can extend any file type that supports it right? like if there are SASS partials in some .scss file, etc you could import and use them to construct a new classname.

```suggestion
In addition to overriding files, you can _extend_ shadowable files.
```

> This means that you can import the component you’re shadowing and then render it. Consider a scenario where you have a custom Card component that you want to wrap the author’s bio in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that you can import the component you’re shadowing and then render it. Consider a scenario where you have a custom `Card` component that you want to wrap the author’s bio in.
```

Without extending the component, you would have to manually copy over the entire component implementation from the theme to wrap it with your custom shadowed component. It might look something like:

```js:title=src/gatsby-theme-blog/components/bio.js
import React from "react"
import { Avatar, MediaObject, Icon } from "gatsby-theme-blog"
import Card from "../components/card"

export default ({ name, bio, avatar, twitterUrl, githubUrl }) => (
  <Card>
    <MediaObject>
      <Avatar {...avatar} />
      <div>
        <h3>{name}</h3>
        <p>{bio}</p>
        <a href={twitterUrl}>
          <Icon name="twitter" />
        </a>
        <a href={githubUrl}>
          <Icon name="github" />
        </a>
      </div>
    </MediaObject>
  </Card>
)
```

This workflow isn’t too bad, especially since the component is relatively straightforward. However, it could be optimized in scenarios where you want to wrap a component or pass a different prop without having to worry about the component’s internals.

## Importing the Shadowed Component

> In the above example it might be preferable to be able to import the `Bio` component and wrap it with your `Card`. With extending you can do the following instead:

Reviewer: We're using "extending" as the name of a shadowing technique. So `With extending` (naming a technique) or `When importing` (performing an activity) I think?

> In the above example it might be preferable to be able to import the `Bio` component and wrap it with your `Card`. With extending you can do the following instead:

Reviewer 2: That works - it was a little confusing to read with how the two sections had been set up, especially with the heading above this sentence. I've updated the suggestion!

```js:title=src/gatsby-theme-blog/components/bio.js
import React from "react"
import { Author } from "gatsby-theme-blog/src/components/bio"
import Card from "../components/card"

export default props => (
  <Card>
    <Author {...props} />
  </Card>
)
```

> This is a quick and efficient way to customize rendering without needing to worry about the implementation details of the component you’re looking to customize. Extending the shadowed component means you can use composition, leveraging a great feature from React.

Reviewer: Could be either IMO. "Extending" being the technique of applying *importing* the parent component specifically to modify and re-export it.

### Applying New Props

> In some cases there could be a component with different variants without an API to modify it outside of shadowing. With component extending you can import that component and then add your new prop to change it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases components offer prop APIs to change their behavior. With component extending you can import that component and then add your new prop to change it.
```

> If `NewsletterButton` accepts a `variant` prop which changes the look and colors of the button, you can use it when you extend the component. Below, `NewsletterButton` is re-exported and `variant="link"` is added in the shadowed file to override its default value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If `NewsletterCTA` accepts a `variant` prop which changes the look and colors of the call to action, you can use it when you extend the component. Below, `NewsletterCTA is re-exported and `variant="link"` is added in the shadowed file to override its default value.
```

Making this a little less of an antipattern by not mentioning buttons.

> ```js:title=src/gatsby-theme-blog/components/newsletter/button.js

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```js:title=src/gatsby-theme-blog/components/newsletter/call-to-action.js
```

> import { NewsletterButton } from "gatsby-theme-blog/src/components/newsletter"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import { NewsletterCTA } from "gatsby-theme-blog/src/components/newsletter"
```

> export default props => <NewsletterButton {...props} variant="link" />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
export default props => <NewsletterCTA {...props} variant="link" />
```

```

## Using the CSS Prop

In addition to passing a different prop to a component you’re extending, you might want to apply CSS using the [Emotion CSS prop](/docs/emotion/). This will allow you to change the styling of a particular component without changing any of its functionality.

> ```js:title=src/gatsby-theme-blog/components/newsletter/button.js

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```js:title=src/gatsby-theme-blog/components/newsletter/call-to-action.js
```

> import { NewsletterButton } from "gatsby-theme-blog/src/components/newsletter"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import { NewsletterCTA } from "gatsby-theme-blog/src/components/newsletter"
```

export default props => (

>   <NewsletterButton

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <NewsletterCTA
```

    css={{
      backgroundColor: "rebeccapurple",
      color: "white",
      boxShadow: "none",
    }}
    {...props}
  />
)
```

> **Note:** For this approach to work NewsletterButton has to accept a className property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note:** For this approach to work NewsletterCTA has to accept a className property.
```

```js:title=src/gatsby-plugin-theme-ui/index.js
import theme from "gatsby-plugin-theme-ui/src"

const { colors } = theme
export default {
  ...theme,
  colors: {
    ...colors,
    primary: "tomato",
  },
}
```

This provides a nice interface to extend an object if you want to change a couple values from the defaults.

## How Much Shadowing is too Much Shadowing?

> If you find yourself shadowing a large number of components in a particular theme it might make sense to fork and modify the theme instead.

Reviewer: Maybe a mention of the `-core` pattern here?

```suggestion
If you find yourself shadowing a large number of components in a particular theme it might make sense to fork and modify the theme instead. The official themes support this pattern using a set of `-core` parent themes. `gatsby-theme-blog` relies on `gatsby-theme-blog-core` so you can fork `gatsby-theme-blog` (or skip it completely) to render your own components without having to worry about dealing with any of the page creation or data sourcing logic.
```

> ## How Much Shadowing is too Much Shadowing?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## How much shadowing is too much shadowing?
```
Updating to sentence case per the Style Guide.
